All the opponents of nuclear power have
reinforced it.
Now they have made it so difficult that I don't know
whether Three Mile Island will get started up or
not. If it does, it will cost them so much that it'll
distort the whole picture insofar as the
economics of nuclear power are concerned. All or
nothing.
they it ought to be a wonderful lesson to us i think
we ought to feel we ought to feel great about
nuclear power as a result of three mile island
because did all the things wrong that you could
hardly do wrong and still the thing took care of
itself and uh it's gonna well i'd like to see it back
in operation okay now let's go back into history
and i would like to know about uh more technical
question. What was the size of the staff that you
had at the Armed Forces Special Weapons Project?
How large was the bureaucracy? Let's see.
I had about 200
people in Washington at the headquarters.
And I had about 500
people at Sandia base.
And maybe another 50 that was scattered Los
Alamos, Little Moore, Rocky Flats, other sites,
Arco, Nevada.
And then had a contingence of troops and
maintenance people at all of the weapons storage
sites. And that depended upon the size of the site
and what had to be guarded. So it was
like 3,000. troops out at the site, troops and
maintenance personnel. Now can you tell me about
the relations that you had, oh well first, were
those 3,000, how many were civilians and how many
were military?
All of the people at the sites were military.
All of them at Sandia were military, except maybe
fifty.
Those in headquarters in Washington,
they were about one-third, or about two-thirds
military. I'm not talking about clerks and
secretaries. I'm talking
about the professional people. Now, how good were
the relations between the professionals,
civilians, and the military administration?
Very, very good. Very good. Most of the military
people that we had in Opswap, and in AEC for that
matter, who
were concerned with command functions or
technical functions, where personnel were
qualified technically to about the same level
that the people were in AEC. We had many of them with
PhDs, lots of them with masters. We had nuclear
physicists, astrophysicists, very highly
qualified military personnel.
So the relationship was very, very good. One thing
that I was wondering about is that, well, they just
retired Admiral Rickover, and I was wondering if
you worked on the submarine project and the
development of the nuclear subs. Even though, of
course, this is Air Force versus Navy, but still.
Well, I worked on it in about three senses, three
manners. One in the Military Liaison Committee. I
worked with Rickover, whose office was right next
door in the AEC, in helping him get on with the early
stages of it.
Then later, in Armed Forces Special Weapons
Project, we had very little to do with effects of a
good many of the things that were going on in the
submarines, and particularly as it related to
placing nuclear weapons in submarines. So, we did
quite a bit of work with them on that. Later on, when
I took over the general manager of the commission,
of course, he was head of the nuclear submarine
division of the reactor development division of
the staff. And so in that capacity was under the
general manager. And so he submitted his programs
to me and budgets, and they were all blended into
the reactor development budget and the
commission budget and defended before the
Congress and wherever. And of course, Rickover
was quite good before the Congress in his own
defense, but it takes more than Rickover to get his
money. So for the six years that I was there, I
defended his budget before the Congress, as did
he.
So I was fairly deeply involved. I've got a whole
bunch of pictures in there of the launching of one
of the subs in which I participated.
Rickover has his friends and his critics in
Congress, and he's just been in forced
retirement. It's been said that he was very
difficult to get along with, especially if you
were on the wrong side of him. What was your
relationship like? What type of person did you
think he was? Well, I think there's no such thing as
getting along with Rickover, for anybody, not for
me or for anybody else. The question is... just how
badly do you get tangled up with him, and can you go
ahead and accomplish what both of you are trying to
accomplish in spite of that fact? And I think I was
able to do that.
So I think if Rick and I were talking, we'd say the
same things about each other. I'd have a little
different emphasis than he does. And
I have a great deal of respect for his abilities and
capabilities in a number of areas. And in some
other areas, I think he's nuts. I suspect he'd say
the same thing about me. In spite of the fact that he
is very, very good and has done a wonderful job, I
think, overall for the nation in creating a
nuclear subsurface navy. And I think he has done
that.
I think he's done a lot of damage to particular to
other aspects of the armed forces. For example?
For the surface Navy is one example. I'm sure the
Secretary of the Navy or the Black Shoe Admirals
are not a damn bit happy about a lot of the things
he's doing. I'm sure of
it. He has pressed the contractors, Rick has, the
electric boat, the other people who do the work,
but more particularly their subcontractor,
to the point that it's just almost impossible to
work with them. Well, you can't condemn all of
that, because, and part of it, Rick, is perfectly
right, and it's shameful, the thing that they get
by with. But it's not all of them, all of the time.
There has to be an accommodation so you can get on
with your job. But his is a fight from daylight till
dark with any contractor that he's working with.
Most of the naval officers that work with him,
manning the submarines, just, just
can hardly stomach it at all.
That's not 100% true, but, but I'll know.
My son-in-law in the Navy was called in, in a group
by Rick to, because he got, got his choice of the top
young officers of the Navy as of any particular
time. There for some And he was an engineering
officer, my son-in-law, and I called him in and
examined his qualifications along with others in
that same group. And he was particularly
belligerent to Rickover on that thing and got
turned down. I haven't seen a happier young man in
my life, and I found out he got turned down. He
didn't go in there because he sure didn't want
anything.
It must have been difficult having him for a
subordinate, having Rickover for a subordinate.
I could usually agree with
with the things that were the Commission's
responsibility in his job. And he was answering,
of course, to the Department of Defense in his
other hat. And that's where the real problem
was. Because ours was essentially research and
development on various aspects of the reactor
itself. the procurement of that reactor and its
installation and the submarine and the submarine
contract and all that was, that was a defense
problem. And I'm sure I couldn't have gotten along
with him if I'd had all that responsibility. But we
gave him support in the nuclear side of the thing
and we were able to agree on what the budget should
be and how he should run it overall. And having done
that and got it through Congress, I could turn it
over to him, and then all I had to do was audit it
after that, because he ran it okay, no problem. So
there was not such a tremendous area of
disagreement for us to get at each other's throat
about. So we got along fine. And I admire Rickover
in a lot of ways. I think he thinks he knows too damn
much about too many things, and I think it's always
dangerous when a guy gets himself into that frame
of mind.
He's an authority on education, among other
things. He's written a couple of books I have in
there on education, what's wrong with American
education.
Whether I like him or don't like him, or whether I
like his characteristics or don't like them, or
whether I think he ought to be in the Navy until he's
82 or retired 20 years ago, I still have to face the
fact that he has been consistent and persistent
enough that we, the United States, have a damn good
underwater naval capability.
it badly. And without Rick, I'm not sure we'd have
it. And so, whatever else I might think about it,
I'm thankful that he was there. How did he ever stay
in the Navy until he was 82?
He stayed there by one mechanism. He convinced the
the Joint Committee of the Congress, Joint
Committee on Atomic Energy of the Congress, that
he was right and the Navy was wrong,
and they promoted him the first time. They forced
the Navy to promote him and kept him on there. He
took advantage of that, and he kept the Congress
fully informed at all times, Congress being the
joint committee primarily.
And he became very close friends of people who were
chairmen of the joint committee, Senator
Anderson from New Mexico and Congressman
Holifield from California, who kind of
alternated the chairmanship.
He became a very close friend of Senator Cannon
from Missouri, head of the Appropriations
Committee. And Senator Cannon ran that goddamn
Congress for a mighty long time. And there didn't
anybody dispute his authority either. And this
carried on. So it's the Congress that has kept Rick
in his job. They've supported his program.
They've listened to him talk. We've gotten
somewhat of a kick out of it, and they have forced
the Navy to keep him on. They had to promote—the
Congress promoted him from captain to rear
admiral, and they promoted him to vice admiral,
and they have kept him on active duty all this time.
Not the Department of Defense, but the Congress.
And he's used everything in his power to do that,
even capitalizing a little bit on the fact that
he's Jewish and a little anti-Semitism that
somebody can dream up.
He's pretty good at some of these things. You heard
him yesterday talking to Proxmire, I guess, and
telling him about it. Well, that's your fault. You
gave them the money.
I wanted to have just your opinion on the neutron
bomb.
I mean, whether we should have it or not? Well, yes,
the neutron bomb is not new. No.
people thought about it even before I was involved
in the atomic energy business. And that principle
has been under test for quite a long time. And it was
finally developed so that it, as a practical
weapon, could be used. And its effect has been
explained.
So it becomes now a question of, is that an effect
that we need in our arsenal
in the current position we're in in the world
vis-a-vis the Soviet Union? And I think the answer
to that is clearly yes. I think we ought to make it
and stockpile it, regardless of what the hell
anybody else thinks. And if a time ever comes that
we need to use it in our own interest, use it,
whether anybody else likes it or not.
Because Western Europe, Italy,
or I shouldn't cite Italy, any of them over there,
We're going to be hauling louder than anybody else
if the time comes and we need to use it and we don't
have it. How come you didn't have it? So it's a good
weapon and it's for a good purpose. It's one we need
in our arsenal and I think we ought to get on with it.
Okay. Now I want to go back and I want to ask you about
the development of storage sites for atomic
weapons. At first we didn't have any atomic
weapons and then we started to develop them. What
were the problems with building storage sites?
How did we pick storage sites?
Well, there were really two major problems
initially I'm talking about.
One was how did one store these so that
it would be almost impossible for anyone to get
access to them, either to take them, that is, take
them because we're the only ones in the world who
had them at that time, take them from a secrecy
standpoint,
And how could you prevent access to them by anyone
who wanted to use them for some other purpose,
such as terror or blackmail or whatnot?
And how could you protect them from a major
situation in which there was limited invasion or
insurrection or something in which there was a
force available to try to take them by force?
And of course, the other thing, the other major
consideration at the time Under what conditions
do you store them so that if there was an accidental
detonation, the least amount of damage would be
done? Damage to people, to the surrounding
country, to the installation itself, to any other
weapon that you would have?
So the answer to all of these, the best answer
anyone could come up with, turned out to be
cutting back into mountains, into solid rock,
with chambers to store these under controlled
conditions of humidity, temperature, and this
sort of thing. Places where they could be secured
individually in
their compartments, in an area that was large
enough that if something happened to this one, the
one next to it wouldn't be affected, and so on. And
then to enclose the entire area and guard it in a
manner to deny access to the site, even though
people presumably when they got on site couldn't
get into the individual storage locations.
So this was, that's the way it was accomplished.
Now are these sites, are they top secret, or can you
tell me where some of those are? No, I don't know.
what their classification are now. As a matter of
fact, I don't even know where they are now. So
they've changed over the years? That's good. Oh,
yeah. Why do they change them? I mean, if they have a
successful site or one that's secure. Well, they
haven't changed them all. I don't mean that.
They've produced a lot of weapons since I got out of
the business, so I don't know where they have put
them. And that's good, I don't want them. But they
are located usually within a few miles of
locations from which they're going to be used. Oh,
I see. from the major missile launch areas, from
the major sack areas, from the major attack areas.
So there are a number of sites. I built five while I
was in Nashua because it was our job to find them,
build them, occupy them, take custody of weapons
and put them in them and see that they stay there.
see that they were maintained and ready to go.
So I built five of the five. The one everyone knows
about, I suspect, is near Albuquerque, the first
one. It's
still there, and I'm sure it's still occupied.
Now, why did you leave the Armed Forces Special
Weapons Project? Was your tour of duty on? Yes, it
was. See I had been in there
nearly six years, about that. And I had been the
deputy and then I became the chief and it was time to
do something else.
Well, were you happy with your next assignment as
the commander, Joint Task Force 7, Nuclear Test
Organization? Yes, very. Very. Yeah, it was a very
good assignment, a very, very rough problem. One
that would be extremely difficult to handle. Now,
why were you only there a year? because that's how
long it took to do it. We finished the job. Okay.
Let's talk about that. What were your
responsibilities?
The
Joint Task Force, in this case Joint Task Force
Seven,
has the job of testing
overseas, it doesn't operate within the United
States, such weapons and devices as the Atomic
Energy Commission and the Secretary of Defense
might direct.
This one was primarily a development test program
to be conducted and
primarily in Inuitak, although also included
Bikini and Kwajalein, and as it turned out,
Johnson Island, before we got through.
The emphasis of the testing was on medium- and
high-yield thermonuclear devices to determine
their characteristics and decide which ones
would go into production for what purposes and in
what configurations, as well as to get a number of
weapons effects, many of the weapons effects. two
of the detonations were to be conducted at high
altitude,
primarily for effects purposes, although we were
also testing the devices.
And they worked. I've forgotten how many tests
were conducted in that series, but it was like 38 or
40.
What were the major—what did you learn from these
tests? The major? What did you learn from these
tests and the new information?
From the standpoint of development of the
weapons,
it is so highly technical and is a
space and time there that I would have to go back and
refresh myself
to be specific about. But we moved to stockpile
after those tests. with several warheads that
were firmed up as a result of those taps, so that we
knew exactly what their configuration was,
exactly what their yield was, and exactly what
their effects were, so that we could then put them
into a weapons system, establish those weapons
characteristics, and go to production. That was,
of course, the real big achievement of the test
series.
We had many weapons effects programs that either
confirmed or developed a
information we needed to further our weapons
effects business. And the one at high altitude
gave us the effects on the ionosphere and on the
atmosphere and
answered many technical questions.
I think eliminated the need for further testing up
there and certainly took away any doubts about
what it did. One
thing I wanted to ask was what weapon systems, new
weapon systems resulted from your test at Joint
Task Force
7. Can you talk about that? I think that there
probably were none that you could say this
resulted directly from this test. Weapons
systems take many years and many considerations
and probably usually many tests. And so while this
one
conform many aspects or develop many new planning
factors and things like that. As far as I can
remember right now, it didn't develop a
particular weapon system. It
cannot come as a result of one test.
It gave us the information we needed to make the
decisions as to what warheads to put on several
weapons and weapons systems.
But of course it's only one element of such a
decision.
Why did you retire? From the Air Force? Yes. Well, I
was asked to take this job as general manager of AEC
by people that I had a great deal of respect for. Mr.
Strauss, who was chairman of the AEC at that time,
Louis Strauss, and John McCone, who was coming in
to be chairman shortly, and by President
Eisenhower, who was president at the time. And it
was a, to me, a real challenge in terms of my earlier
decisions and earlier experience. And I wanted to
know whether I could do something outside of the
military because I hadn't had really an
opportunity to find out.
So I debated it hard and
finally decided to do it. Whether it was a good
thing to do, I haven't any idea because I went to see
General White, who was Chief of Staff of the Air
Force at that time, to see if he would honor my
request for early retirement.
He entreated me not to do it, and pointed out that I
wasn't doing so bad in the Air Force, which I
certainly had to agree with.
there were a number of new assignments and
promotions coming up right then, right
immediately.
And I feel sure that I would have been one of them had
I stayed in. Of course, what the field doesn't
amount to very much, because I understand you
don't know the answer to it, but
I think I would have been placed in either the
Logistics Command or the Development Command and
promoted to three stars probably by the end of that
year. But I didn't stay for that. I decided to go
ahead and retire early and take this other job
because you cannot, by law, occupy that position,
statutory position.
while you retain your status as an active duty
officer in the armed services. So I had to retire in
order to qualify under the law to take the job. Do
you regret retiring? Do you regret retiring? You
might have been able to make four stars. You
certainly were young enough. I feel confident
that I would have. I was young enough and I was in the
right spot and I had the right head start and
everything else, so I think yes, I would have made
four stars all right.
I wouldn't have had a lot of the experiences that I
had. I might have had some that were more
interesting, I don't know, but I doubt it.
But I don't regret anything.
in that respect.
I have to look back and say that's the decision and I
went on and did the best I could in light of that
decision and that I think was
credible and very interesting, so I don't regret
it. Can you tell me about your retirement
ceremony?
There really wasn't one, because I was
not in Washington at the time when there could have
been a but they had normally over at Bowling Air
Force Base. And the change was being made in the
commission, or had been made, chairman change.
And because I couldn't get there in time, they had a
man acting in my place as general manager and were
anxious for me to get on board. So I went right from
the Joint Task Force one day to the AEC the next day
and took over General Manager. There weren't all
retirement ceremonies.
Let's talk about this job as General Manager.
How large was the AEC at this time? What size, what
type of responsibilities are we discussing?
Well,
AACSNO operated
with
a minimum number of government personnel and a
major effort with contractors.
So, I think it would be almost impossible to
We have a number of people in contractors, but
if we took the three points, about 4,000 people in
AEC,
a little over $4 billion budget, and like 300,000
people under contract. That would give a measure
of magnitude. That's about what it was. This is
more a responsibility than you ever had in your
life then. Yes. Did you enjoy the new position?
Well, enjoy is
perhaps not the right word.
It was so big, so quick. that I didn't have time for
anything except work and keep my head above water.
I took the job the first of December 1958.
Congress back in session by early January and four
billion dollars worth of budget to defend It takes
a lot of doing. And so I would really cover it up very
fast. And of course, the activities are still
going full underway while you defend the budget.
So operating problems were terrific.
And of course, I was new to the commission. The
people in it who were operating didn't know my
policies or my views or whatnot. So it was a really
hectic, busy time for me. I spent about 15, 16 hours
a day at it for the first year at least.
I want to talk about the issues or the major
problems in the AEC at that time that you were
directly involved with. What were some of the
issues or headaches? Well, they
Promotion of application of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes, of course, is the primary
mission. And everywhere you turn there are people
fighting this objective. So just keeping the
fires put out was a hell of a job all by itself. Are
these people the environmentalists? Well, it
includes those. It's not limited to those. It
includes all kinds of people. One group that's
particularly troublesome that it includes is a
bunch of so-called scientists, or people who call
themselves scientists. They haven't been really
successful on the positive side. So they go to the
negative side to make themselves heard. And some
of them work for you, you, the commission.
This creates real troublesome problems.
What was your question directed? We were talking
about the issues and the problems. One you said
were the scientists. That went across the board,
of course. The real issues were on the positive
side, of course, with power reactors,
development of power reactors, power
applications. At the same time, we were
developing the ram chip for military
application.
Isotopes,
tremendous amount of work with isotopes. We're
getting started well on fusion power,
about 30 million a year on that at that time.
The increase in capacity of the diffusion plants
Which is a really major problem.
And electricity or power for those plants.
Because at one time we were using one-tenth of all
the power generated in the United States. No
kidding.
That's a pretty big magnitude of thing. That's for
sure. And weapons and weapons testing, of course.
It was always there and it was always a really
big issue in one form or another the whole time.
That covers an awful lot of ground that I've just
said there. Those could be broken down into dozens
and dozens of issues, such as
providing the facilities for high energy physics
and low energy physics, the roles of the
universities and educational institutions. in
the AC. How did Texas A&M get a cyclotron, for
example? That came out of this consideration
during that time.
Well, let's start in on some of these. What about
Plowshare? Placere was another of the issues
here, and of course Placere was the use of nuclear
explosives for peaceful purposes. Our primary
effort there was directed at the use of the
explosives to move earth, such as you would do to
dig a new Panama Canal, for example.
And by the time I left the commission and the
program closed down shortly after that, the
techniques and technology had been developed
adequately to use nuclear explosives to do many
peaceful things. It's never possible to remove
all of the radioactivity and the other
considerations that go with it from that process.
And with the rising opposition to nuclear...